 Few foreign masterpieces can have suffered more than Eugene Onegin from
the English  translator's failure to convey anything more than -- at best --
the literal meaning.  It is  as if  a  sound-proof wall separated  Pushkin's
poetic novel from the English-reading world.  There  is  a whole magic which
goes by default: the  touching lyrical  beauty, the cynical wit of the poem;
the  psychological  insight,  the  devious  narrative  skill, the thrilling,
compulsive  grip of the novel; the tremendous gusto and swing and panache of
the whole performance.
     Vladimir Nabokov's rendering into unrhymed iambics reproduces the exact
meaning, but explicitly disclaims any further ambition. While Nabokov admits
that  in  losing  its  rhyme   the  work  loses  its  ``bloom''  he  argues,
irrefutably,  that  no rhyming  version  can  be literally  accurate. It can
however certainly strive  for something else. It can attempt to produce some
substitute for  the ``bloom'' of  the original, without  which the  work  is
completely  dead.  It  can try to convey the poet's tone  of voice,  whether
world-weary  or romantic, the sparkle  of  his jokes,  the  flavour  of  his
epigrams, the snap of his  final couplets. None of these effects can  emerge
from  a  purely  literal  unrhymed  translation.  In  fact,  to  offset  the
inevitable  loss in verbal  exactness,  a  rhyming  version  can  aim  at  a
different sort of accuracy, an equivalence or parallelism conveying, however
faintly, the impact of the original.
     Apart from the overall  difficulty of  his  task, the  translator  with
ambitions of this  type will find  that Pushkin's work presents him with two
particular problems.
     The brio of the Russian text partly depends on a lavish use not only of
French and other foreign words, but of  slang and of  audacious Byronic-type
rhymes.  If  the  translator produces nothing comparable, he is emasculating
his original. If he attempts to follow suit, he must  do all he can to avoid
the pitfalls of the embarrassing, the facetious and the arch. {29}
     Secondly, he must be on his guard against the ludicrous effect that the
feminine  ending (for instance the pleasure/measure rhyme, which is so  much
derided by Nabokov) can all too easily produce in English. He must not sing,
like Prince Gremin in one English version of Chaykovsky's opera: